[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
Raise your hand
if you have a firm
understanding of the economy.
I didn't raise mine either.
From my vantage point, it
seems like one big charade,
a source of infotainment
for the evening news
and cable channels.
Yet for many, if not most
of us, our money situation
causes far more
pain than pleasure.
This means we are now
on a need to know basis
as to what's going on.
Toward that end, I've
invited Ranting Andy Hoffman
to help us work our way through
the maze of how the world's
economies were brought
to the brink of collapse.
And what we can do about
it, if anything, now.
And I want to thank
you for joining us.
This is critical information.
You spent 15 to 20 years
as a Wall Street analyst.
And some of the people that
are in the headlines today
were your former bosses.
So you know what the game is.
And I love what you
do on your blog.
Because you don't
pull any punches.
But you do such a
beautiful job of tying
what seem disparate
bits of economic news
together to see where this
whole thing is flowing badly.
>>ANDY HOFFMAN: Yeah.
Well, what I learned--
the one thing
I got from Wall
Street that's helpful
these days is communication.
But after that, it's
completely different.
I've almost become-- I don't
want to say a whistle blower,
but a crusader
against what I saw.
I left the industry in 2005.
In fact, I was with
Salomon Smith Barney,
which is a Citigroup
company, for seven years.
And I learned more about
the bad side of Wall Street
than I could imagine.
And the funny thing
is, what happened
back then was nothing
compared to what we see today.
>>REGINA: I know.
Sad.
Sadly but true.
You know what I thought I'd do.
I have this little
list of questions here.
Because we literally could
talk for 8 or 10 hours
and barely unravel
what's going on.
But I thought what we'd do
is maybe start back 1929,
runs on the bank, what
the world was like.
What the context of this was
like in a country that was
not-- it wasn't-- our economies
weren't so global at the time.
What was it then and then
lead forward from there.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, back
then the United States
was an emerging
power in the world.
We were also on a
gold standard, as was
much of the rest of the world.
So what you saw was
what you got when
it came to economic activity.
The Federal Reserve
had just been
created about 15 years before.
So there really was no real
debt load yet to speak of.
And it didn't take
long from 1913
until the roaring '20s for
the banks to do what they do,
which is to promote
debt and speculation.
And that's what the
roaring '20s was.
It was not a change in mindset.
It was an increase in wealth
created by the same banker
games they're playing today,
only on a much lesser level.
By the time we got to the late
'20s, remember markets were not
manipulated back then.
So there were no
government means
of trying to alter perception.
And you know, we
had a market crash,
which is what
happens in markets.
It has nothing to do with
whether it's boom or bust.
They happen.
In that particular time, it was
the United States' first period
of rampant banker
funded speculation.
So it really took
the world by storm.
And when it happened,
the government
didn't know how to react.
Banks were closing.
And there was no backup system.
There was really no plan at all.
So it took 20 years or
so to get out of that.
And it's a misnomer that
the war helped end it.
It really didn't.
If anything, the war helped
the United States simply
because all of our competitors
overseas destroyed themselves.
That's how we came to power.
And you know, but
after the crash,
they created things like
the Glass Steagall Act.
>>REGINA: I was just
going to ask that, yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: To stop
banks from speculating
with people's money.
And you know, that--
>>REGINA: Explain the
Glass Steagall Act to us
in kindergarten
terms, so we really
understand what they
were trying to do
and what happened
when, essentially, we
moved away from that
about 20 years ago.
>>HOFFMAN: OK.
Well, in today's world, you
only hear the word banks.
They may be referred to as mega
banks, too big to fail banks,
but you only hear
the word banks.
But even 10 years ago,
let alone back then,
there were what you call
commercial banks and investment
banks.
Now a commercial bank is
what you think a bank as.
You put in your money, that
you borrow money from them.
They take your deposits.
And they supposedly invest
them into safe securities,
almost like an insurance
company would do.
And they're supposedly
safe, you know.
They're there
almost as non-profit
for the neighborhood.
>>REGINA: So if you
need-- so the point was,
there had been a
run on the banks.
We had this disaster
economically.
So this is to ensure
that you, as a depositor,
can go and get your
money out of the bank
safely at any given time.
>>HOFFMAN: Right.
>>REGINA: It's supposed
to be a guarantee, right.
>>HOFFMAN: But the difference
between a commercial bank
and an investment bank, and
again Solomon Smith Barney
was an investment bank, today
it would just be called a bank,
but that's the misnomer.
They call it investment bank.
But it's not really
a bank at all.
It's a speculation machine.
Their primary business
is IPOs like Facebook.
That's what they
do for a living.
They also have what they call
proprietary trading, which
simply means they gamble
with their own money.
They don't have
deposits, just people
who have brokerage accounts.
So it's a completely
different animal.
It has nothing to do with
what a traditional bank is.
And until the roaring
'20s, the banks
just did the former,
what I was talking about.
They just lent money.
OK.
But then the banks after
the Federal Reserve
came around and started to get
control of the money supply,
and the government, they
started to speculate.
And that's what
caused the crash then.
So after the crash,
Glass Steagall
was created to separate
those two things.
So if you want to
be a speculator,
you are an investment bank.
You can't be part
of the FDIC system.
You have to be your
own financial company.
That has nothing to do
with government backing.
And that's what
we saw proliferate
from the '20s through 1999, when
Glass Steagall was repealed.
So you saw these huge growth
in these non-bank banks.
And then when they
got powerful enough,
they were able to
lobby the government
during the good times
of 1999 when internet--
>>REGINA: Yeah,
the roaring '90s.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah, saying well
look at great everything is.
We don't need to
have this separation.
Plus we're going to buy you.
Because you know who had the
most campaign contributions
for Bush in 2000 and
2004, Obama in 2008,
and Mit Romney in 2012,
is from Wall Street.
They kind of took over.
And you see the people
who took over positions
of off-- Robert Rubin, Secretary
of the Treasury, Tim Geithner.
>>REGINA: Tim Geithner, yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: All these guys,
they come from Wall Street.
Obama's just had
the Chief of Staff
was William Daley, who was a
managing director at JP Morgan,
and before that
Rahm Emanuel, who
worked for Goldman Sachs
and all these guys.
So the point is, they kind
of took over the system
and convinced, through campaign
contributions, people like Bill
Clinton and the senators
who were around in the '90s,
that we don't need this.
And when they got
rid of it in 1999,
that was the
beginning of the end.
On top of that, that
was also the end
of a kind of upswing
in the economy.
So you had the banks getting
more lethal at a time
where the economy
was getting worse.
>>REGINA: So In 1999,
the Glass Steagall
was repealed in essence.
And so now does that mean
that the FDIC was covering
both the wild investment,
the investment
banks, and the commercial banks?
They're liable for both?
I mean--
>>HOFFMAN: They
created something
called SIPC, Securities
Income Protection, which
is like FDIC for
brokerages accounts.
So again, this is
the kind of things
that bankers get accomplished.
>>REGINA: But this isn't right.
The government should not be
paying for gambling debts.
>>HOFFMAN: That's exactly right.
But when the bankers own the
government, and they truly do,
they get whatever they want.
>>REGINA: Right.
So that leads us
up to 2007, 2008.
Now there were some big
bumps along the way.
It's not like we haven't
seen difficult times before.
Early 1980s, god I remember
when interest rates on homes
were at 14 and 15%, even higher.
And then we had the savings
and loan debacle as well.
What was happening during
that little period, as opposed
to what's happening now?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, that period
was just after the gold standard
had come off, which was 1971.
So again, the nation
didn't have a lot of debt.
And it's no coincidence
that the nation
didn't have a lot
of debt until 1971.
I mean, we're at the public
debt that's announced
today is $16 trillion dollars.
It was about $200 or
$300 billion back then.
And that was from
200 years of history.
That's because the
gold standard does not
allow you to build up debt
without having a commensurate
increase in gold.
So when-- in the
1970s, the government
could print all the money it
wanted to get out of things.
And it could raise
interest rates.
Because unlike now, where
we have all this debt
across the entire
system, it could
take higher interest rates here.
They're at zero right now.
Some countries have just gone
to negative interest rates.
They literally can't
afford even a tiny increase
in interest rates.
Of course, low interest
rates is bad for savers.
No one wants money in the bank.
And again, a backup on your
question, in the '70s it
was really a cyclical
downturn, which
was exacerbated by political
tensions in the Middle East
that caused oil prices to go up.
So it was really more
of a regular downturn
that got exacerbated.
>>REGINA: OK.
And then you had the
savings and loan scandals
that took place in the
'80s, right, on top of that.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
And the savings
and loan scandals
were more of a function
of just shoddy bank
practices than
something more sinister.
I mean, there were some
bad people involved.
But again, they had the
savings and bank loan.
They created the-- I forgot
what the name of that agency
was-- to clean it up.
And they did.
Because again, it was
clean up-able back then.
>>REGINA: It was clean up-able
and fairly isolated in a sense.
And it took a few years, not
too long, to recover from that,
as I recall.
>>HOFFMAN: Right, it
really was not a big deal
for the majority of the
public, and certainly
was not felt anywhere
around the world.
>>REGINA: OK, so then we're
back to the free market.
OK.
Let's talk about
the free market.
It sounds from everything
I'm hearing, and certainly
the subtext, and the direct
text of what you say,
we don't really
have free markets.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, we don't--
in the United States,
we have zero free markets.
And I mean utter zero.
In fact, there are
actually names.
And part of what I do is I'm
pointing out the obvious.
A lot of people think
well, you're so smart.
You're so tuned
into these things.
I go, you know, I'm
just telling you
what's the public information.
The Federal Reserve
manipulates bonds
with what they call quantitative
easing, operation twist.
The ECB calls it long term
refinancing operations.
They call it the swap agreement.
The fact is they are in business
to buy bonds and manipulate
the market.
There's also a public
group created in 1987
by Ronald Reagan right after
the crash, the stock crash,
called the President's Working
Group on Financial Markets.
You can Google it.
It's very well defined.
It involves the leaders
of the SEC, and the CFTC,
and banking leaders.
And their job is to prop
up the stock market.
I mean, it's a
government agency.
There's nothing-- George
Stephanopoulos admitted to it,
talked about it openly
a few years ago.
It's real.
There's also an organization,
a government organization,
called the Exchange
Stabilization Fund.
It's been around 70, 80 years.
Its job, its mandate,
is to manipulate
foreign currency
and gold and silver.
That's what it says.
So, the fact is--
>>REGINA: To manipulate--
manage or manipulate.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, they
would call it manage.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>HOFFMAN: OK.
But my point is that these
organizations, people call
me a conspiracy
theorist, but I'm not.
I'm a scientist when
it comes to finance.
>>REGINA: You're just
calling it like it is.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
And the fact is in
the United States,
we actually have names
for these organizations.
In Europe, which is
a newer organization,
they're still trying
to figure out.
In fact, every day is a new
reaction to something bad.
But because they
have 20 countries,
they don't have
the infrastructure
to create these organizations
that are formal.
So they have to meet
every couple of weeks.
And say well, now we're creating
the long term refinancing
operation, where we
will support bonds.
Now we'll create
the SMP, which is
some British term with the
British language with the oldie
and stuff like that to describe
how buy government bonds.
And so these things have
been around forever.
Now when it comes
to gold, which is
my particular area
of expertise, it's
been manipulated, suppressed,
for the past 1,000, 5,000
years.
Any time there's
been a government
that wanted to
control the currency,
they suppress the price of gold.
First they take it.
And then they suppress.
>>REGINA: They've
confiscated it in the past.
And that did happen, I
think, in '33, right?
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
but again, nothing was
actually taken from anyone.
>>REGINA: No it wasn't.
Now explain that.
Because that's what-- you always
read that gold was confiscated.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
>>REGINA: What
actually happened.
>>HOFFMAN: It's one
of the few things
that people who know
nothing seem to know.
And they come at me.
I won't buy gold because
it was confiscated.
It will get confiscated again.
Now in 1933, we were in the
middle of the Great Depression.
And FDR had just
come into office.
And he put out a
decree that says,
you must give in your gold
for the fixed price of $20.67.
Because we were still
on a gold standard.
That's what it was worth.
Now, even before
that decree, there
were public calls
for patriotism.
We need to help the country.
The country can't-- again,
when you have a gold standard,
you can't spend like on the
Tennessee Valley Authority
without gold in hand.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: That's
the beauty of it.
You can't create debt.
You can't spend without it.
So there were kind of
public calls for patriotism.
Turn in your gold and
we'll give you money.
And this was before the decree.
And people gave it
in hand over fist.
>>REGINA: OK.
So this was voluntary.
It was the spirit of the times.
>>HOFFMAN: Before 1933, yes.
>>REGINA: It wasn't
as though you
had he police
knocking on your door
taking your gold away from you.
>>HOFFMAN: And again, at that
time there was a gold standard.
Every gold-- every dollar
said on it payable to
for X amount of ounces of gold.
So if the government
said, we really
need to expand our spending.
Can you just give us your gold.
We'll give you dollars
that are gold backed.
People were like, fine.
We can just get them
back in the future.
They're gold backed.
Of course, what he did was
after he made the decree, all
the gold that had been
given to them, they said A,
you can't have it back.
It's now illegal to own it.
And B, we're now
valuing at $35 an ounce.
So we get twice the
value that you had.
And you can't have it back.
So the people learned back
then that the government
is liars, or are
liars, back then.
Which is-- so and even
after that happened,
they didn't take anyone's gold.
Even after they said OK, it's
now $35.00 an ounce and you
can't have it, not a single
ounce was ever taken.
Even there was some
misnomers that they
went into safe deposit
box and took them.
>>REGINA: Hmhm.
Right.
>>HOFFMAN: They didn't.
Of course, I would
never put any in a bank.
I wouldn't put a dollar in a
bank, let alone my valuables,
like a gold bar.
But the fact is
they never took any.
There was actually one lawsuit.
Someone sued because
the government
got a hold of their
gold in some kind
of legal arrange--
legal lawsuit.
And they said, no
you can't have it.
The judges said you can't
take the person's gold.
So no one ever actually
had it confiscated.
And in today's world,
for a million reasons,
I think it's insane
to even comprehend.
>>REGINA: But like
you just said,
you wouldn't put
money in a vault,
in a safe deposit
box in the bank.
>>HOFFMAN: No, I
wouldn't put anything.
>>REGINA: Why, I mean why.
If it couldn't be confiscated,
why would you not trust them?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, I don't trust
the banks for any reasons
because the banks are the people
who have been stealing from us.
And again, the banks and the
government are one in the same.
And when you say JP
Morgan, like people
say oh, JP Morgan, the
short or the silver?
It's not JP Morgan.
It's the government.
And if you have your
stuff in a bank,
that means you're leaving your
possessions in the government's
hands.
And you know what governments
do with people's possessions.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
Now-- so we're not
in a-- we're not
participating in a free market
on any level from what you just
told us, not really.
>>HOFFMAN: No, no.
Some places more than others.
United States, zero.
>>REGINA: And yet we feel
like we have the right
to invest in a stock, or invest
in a bond if we'd like to.
And there's your free market.
We have the freedom to invest.
And here we have a market
that a little while back,
a few years ago, it
dropped all the way down,
as I recall to
something like 7,000.
Now it's back up to 13.
And everyone sees if
you just sit on it,
the free market will
take care of itself.
It's all bounce back.
>>HOFFMAN: Isn't that funny?
The Dow is up to 13,000.
And by the way, in
real terms, if you
use what real inflation is,
it's probably down about 70%
in the past 10 years.
If you look at what real
inflation is, and oh,
by the way, if you include the
four companies that have been
bankrupted or reorganized,
General Motors, Citigroup, AIG,
and Eastman Kodak, the Dow
would be probably 10,000 and not
13,000.
But that's just--
>>REGINA: But I mean,
my understanding is also
that the data on a daily
basis is also manipulated,
in that the companies that
aren't performing so well
might be taken
out of the listing
and you edge over the ones that
maybe had a better day just
to prop whatever number
you want up there.
>>HOFFMAN: That's what I
mean by GM and Citigroup.
>>REGINA: That's it.
Yeah.
OK.
>>HOFFMAN: It's a survivor bias.
>>REGINA: Survivor bias, OK.
>>HOFFMAN: So not only is
the Dow down in real terms,
but if you actually use the
same Dow, it's down also.
But you know, the
mainstream media,
which is part of the
machine, their job
is tell you the Dow is 13,000
so you should be happy.
But the fact is it's 13,000.
Big deal.
The average, there was just
an article out a few weeks ago
that says the average median
net worth is down something
like 40% in the
past five years, OK.
So clearly the Dow at 13,000
is not helping people, OK.
People don't own bond-- you
can't even buy bonds anymore
because they have no yield.
Or you could buy a junk
bond and lose your money.
Or you could buy a
government bond for 0%,
or in Switzerland for
negative 0.5% and pay them.
So whether you buy or
sell a bond or a stock,
remember that the government
has a printing press
and is always on the
other side of the trade,
buying what you're selling,
or selling what you're buying.
And that's why I recommend
people to stay away,
long or short, from
everything paper.
>>REGINA: OK.
Now this morning, I
was reading an article
in the paper that was saying in
2007 when the poop hit the fan,
was there some element
of that was temporarily
reenacted that is it due to go
off December 31st this year?
Or FDIC was to continue its
extending its protections.
Yeah, what is this.
You can see what I'm saying.
Because I can't
remember the details.
>>HOFFMAN: When
that happened, when
what I call Global Meltdown
One occurred in late 2008,
it took the government
by surprise.
They were not prepared for
everything to hit the fan,
because they thought, hey, we
just repealed Glass Steagall.
These banks are doing great.
There's a real
state boom going on.
Everything's well.
They were in the middle
of an election cycle
on top of that
where you just talk
about how great everything is.
So they were taken
by surprise when
the real estate-- it was
basically the real estate
bubble blowing up
that caused that.
The derivatives created by
the 1999 repeal of the Glass
Steagall is what made the
bubble in real estate that
much more lethal.
And so when it came down and
all the derivatives came down
with it, like AIG for
instance, and Citigroup,
and Bear Stearns,
and Lehman Brothers,
they were taken by surprise.
So their initial reaction
was just print, print, print.
You can call it tarp.
You can call it increasing
the size of FDIC and SIPC.
You can call it the
various housing programs
they created to-- with the
first time mortgage, what
do they call it,
the first time buyer
where you get all
the tax credits.
They were just giving
away money basically.
And for a couple
years it worked.
Because people were so shocked
and awed by all the money
that was printed.
And they ran up the
stock market again,
that they thought
everything was fine.
And then kind of like taking the
painkiller off, once it wears
down, you realize that your
bone is just as broken.
In fact, it's a lot more
broken because you've
been walking on this broken
bone for a couple of years.
And that's where we stand today.
And all they know how to
do is just give themselves
more drugs.
>>REGINA: OK, so essentially
at this time let's talk
about FDIC for moment.
Because I think that's-- with
everything going on, people are
thinking, well jeez.
At least my savings or
whatever I have left,
it may not be drawing interest.
But if one of these
banks collapses,
I'm still protected
under the FDIC coverage.
>>HOFFMAN: Well that's assuming
the bank is still there.
Because banks tend
to freeze assets.
You just saw it in
Spain two weeks ago,
a company called Bankia.
It's one of the biggest
banks in all of Spain, froze.
They closed it.
The government had
to nationalize it.
There's one in Italy.
I forgot what it's called.
It's a long Italian name.
It's been in the
state of what they
call bank holiday
for two months now.
You can't get your assets.
We've seen in Russia
the largest bank
in the country, for I think
two weeks last month, stop
processing credit
cards, debit cards.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: So people
who relied on that
couldn't pay for things.
So for one, you're
assuming the banks
are going to still stay open.
And two, you're assuming
that your money in the bank,
that there won't be fees,
that they won't just
confiscate it like MF Global.
Say oh, those funds.
Oh sorry, those funds
were not segregated.
JP Morgan had them.
You'll have to get
them from them.
So you're holding your money.
People hold their money
in a bank right now.
You're getting no interest.
And I mean, no interest.
And for what?
What are you getting for that?
You're getting it to-- you're
letting these companies who
no longer are commercial banks.
Now they're just banks
that can speculate because
of the repeal of Glass Steagall.
They speculate with your money.
The government says sure,
we'll give you your money back.
But you may not get
your money back.
The bank may spend it all.
Or invested it all and lose it.
>>REGINA: So theoretically,
am I hearing this correctly,
that theoretically FDIC
extends to all banks,
including those that
would previously
have been called
investment banks?
>>HOFFMAN: It's a murky
line now of what is a bank
and what's not.
In fact, TARP, when
that came out in 2008,
Term Asset Reduction Program.
I forgot what it stands for.
But it was basically just
giving money to the banks.
Now two banks, Goldman
Sachs and Morgan Stanley,
were considered
investment banks,
which means they're
not really banks.
So the government said to
them, OK, we want to save you.
So as of tomorrow,
you're a bank.
They literally overnight said,
so you're eligible for TARP.
So we'll print money
and give it to you.
And yes, you're saved.
Now how did that money help
the Goldman Sachs clients?
Didn't help them any.
The bank just took the money and
paid record bonuses that year,
if you can believe--
record bonuses.
>>REGINA: I remember.
>>HOFFMAN: And they only
did it, because remember,
that was the fall.
So that was bonus season.
So no one got any
money from that.
I guess you could say if you had
a brokerage account of $100,000
that it's still there.
But of course, you
lost all your money
in the markets because of
Goldman Sachs recommendations.
I remember Goldman Sachs also
happened to be sued and lost,
of course it was a hand
slap, for creating securities
to sell to their clients
and then shorting them.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: So that's
what you get--
>>REGINA: I mean really.
>>HOFFMAN: For your
SIPC protection.
[LAUGHTER]
>>REGINA: This is
really criminal.
What we're talking about
is criminal behavior.
Whether the government chooses
to prosecute and follow
through or label it
that, it is criminal.
And when you're looking
at quantitative easing,
for example.
I was thinking about this.
I was just trying to
get my mind around it.
Because this is not my language.
This is tricky stuff.
And I was thinking, how is,
functionally speaking, what
they did by printing money
through quantitative easing
any different than if one of us
were to counterfeit our money
and flood it into the system?
>>HOFFMAN: There's not
a difference at all.
And again, you're
saying it's criminal.
You wonder about the government.
Why would they let it happen?
Again, the government
and Goldman Sachs
are the same thing.
>>REGINA: One and the same, yes.
>>HOFFMAN: It's literally
the same people.
You know, the head of the
Federal Reserve of New York
is the former Goldman
Chief Economist right now.
We were talking
about Robert Rubin,
who was the chairman
of Goldman Sachs.
He became the Secretary of
the Treasury, Rahm Emanuel,
and the list goes on.
If I had time, I could list
all the people currently.
In fact, the prime
minister-- I'm sorry.
Yes, the prime minister
of Italy, Mario Monte,
he was a former
Goldman Sachs guy, OK.
And the guy who's going to
be the new Bank of England
head, former Goldman Sachs guy.
So these guys are
one in the same.
They rape and pillage.
>>REGINA: This is
a global cartel.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes, it
is a global cartel.
And so it's not sim-- it's
not just about gold or about
stocks.
It's about basically
taking everything from you
so that, you know, you
beg people like Obama
to give you Obamacare,
which has to be
funded by more printed money.
See that's where the
Ponzi scheme comes in.
That's their weakness,
is the paper money.
You can't print it forever.
>>REGINA: Well, why not?
They've been doing it for years.
I mean, that's what people
keep saying is, looks OK to me.
I haven't lost my job yet.
Of course, your
mother has moved back
in because she lost her home.
Your kids move back in because
they can't find any work.
But still it looks normal.
You still have some things
on the shelves at Walmart.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, you-- and I
don't mean you personally--
but you may still have your job.
But the real unemployment
rate in this country,
and I'm talking
about the real rate,
meaning people who can't
afford to pay their bills,
is closer to 20, 25%.
And it's only
going to get worse.
And yes, they can
keep printing money.
They have.
But in terms of the government
statistics, the CPI,
the Consumer Price Index,
that's their statistics which
are heavily
understated, the dollar
has lost 98% of its
purchasing power
since the Federal
Reserve was created.
It's lost 50% since we went
off the gold standard in 1970.
And that's just
what they tell you.
They tell you we printed
this amount of money.
You know they've printed more.
They tell you this is
the inflation rate.
You know it's more.
Just like they tell you we
have 8,133 tons of gold,
which anyone in my
world knows they don't.
>>REGINA: Where'd it go?
>>HOFFMAN: They leased
it and sold it secretly
to maintain the
value of the dollar.
That's their Achilles heel.
Because gold and
silver are real money.
And they always have been.
And what I say when people
ask about that, I say look.
Even if you're the number one--
you're literally Joe six pack,
OK.
You don't work in the
financial industry.
You don't have much money.
You know nothing about
financial markets.
There's probably
two things that are
ingrained in your
DNA about markets.
One is the Dow Jones
Industrial Average,
which is supposedly a barometer
of the health of the nation,
OK.
And you also know about gold.
>>REGINA: We've been
watching what's happened.
All of us have been watching
what's happened with gold.
And a lot of people
have migrated that way,
have gotten out of the
markets and moved toward gold.
And it went as high
as, what was it?
Just under 2,000 a while back.
And it's back down around 1,600.
But it's interesting because
just as the world is becoming
even less stable,
everything's coming unglued.
Bad news everywhere,
which normally you
should see the gold
going like that.
It's not.
It's not really moving.
It's been stuck in the same
place for a couple months now.
What's actually happening?
Are those fixed
too, those prices
fixed too-- the gold
market, silver market?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, first
I'd say that I disagree
that people are watching gold.
You may be watching personally.
And you probably did some
research for the show,
but from my experience
in the world,
probably one out of
1,000 people even
has knowledge that gold is
a market that's tradeable.
>>REGINA: Seriously.
>>HOFFMAN: Let alone to
understand what it means
or how to buy it.
So as far as your second
question, is it manipulated?
There is no market
more manipulated
than the precious metals.
Because as I mentioned
before, they're
the linchpin of the system.
They are the barometer
of something being wrong.
>>REGINA: And so here it's stuck
around 1,600, up or down $20
as the weeks have
gone on, I've noticed.
And yet I've read over
the last few years,
many people I've talked to
on the subject have said,
realistically, gold should
be over 2,000, 2,500, $3,000.
In real terms, that
should be where
it-- that's where it should be.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, first of all,
again we talked about the Dow
at 13,000, how everyone's
crowing about it.
The Dow was 13,000 12 years ago.
And that's again, that's
the pre-Citigroup Dow.
And that's not
including inflation.
Just on an absolute
basis, the Dow
is the same as it
was 12 years ago.
But the mainstream media, every
time it goes up 20 points,
talks about how
great it's doing.
It hasn't gone anywhere.
Gold has been up for
12 years in a row.
Gold was up last year
after they smashed it
down purposely, the
government, after it
hit that high in September.
It was up 13%.
Gold has been, this year
because the system is getting so
near the end, and so
frayed, and the currencies
are being over printed,
and the debt is spiraling,
I have never seen
in my life anything
like what we see in the
suppression this year.
And still, gold is up this year.
It's very resilient because
underlying the paper that they
are naked shorting, which means
basically selling things that--
>>REGINA: Tell us
about shorting.
A lot of people don't
understand shorting.
>>HOFFMAN: OK.
Shorting, if you
go all the way back
to the '70s when it was created,
maybe even the late '60s when
it was created, it was
really, once again,
a banking invention for fees.
Basically it allows you to
borrow someone else's shares,
or gold, or bonds, and bet
that they will go down,
wherein where you'd buy them
back and then return the shares
and pay the brokerage a
fee for that lending that's
called margin.
But as time went
on, people started
to use shorting in
a more sinister way.
Once the banks realized
that they can kind of double
the market, meaning you have
people buying on one side.
And then you have--
you're creating shares
on the other side
to sell, you're
creating more commissions.
And so they started
to promote it heavily.
And then, of course, there
became the manipulation.
Once governments-- once the
US government, in particular,
realized that they
can naked short,
which means create
shares and gold, paper--
>>REGINA: That don't
exist in real gold.
>>HOFFMAN: That
don't exist, yeah.
There are laws that
say you can't do it.
But that's what they do.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I
was going to say,
it sounds-- another thing
that sounds illegal to me,
I mean should be illegal.
>>HOFFMAN: It's
completely illegal.
But that's what they do.
I mean, it's very simple.
They just put in an order
and say sell paper gold,
sell stocks, sell gold mining
shares, whatever it is.
And the market goes down.
And since the CFTC,
which is the commodities
regulator, and the SEC,
which is the stock regulator,
are all part of the same team,
they do whatever they want.
I'm sure it won't surprise you
that the CFTC, which again,
they regulate commodities, is
run by a former Goldman Sachs
executive.
And the same will go across
all of these agencies, which
are supposedly regulatory.
So--
>>REGINA: It doesn't
sound like there's
much regulation of any
kind going on, though.
>>HOFFMAN: No.
No, in fact, they
created this thing
called Dodd-Frank about three
or four years ago, which
celebrated its second or third
anniversary a week or two ago.
It hasn't even
been finished yet.
So they crow about how they're
creating regulation to help.
But they don't even
finish the regulation.
I think it's something like
2000 pages and growing.
But it hasn't
regulated anything.
And the point is, it's
not going to be regulated.
The whole point is the
banks and the government
have now become so
powerful that they realize
that they don't
have to regulate.
The average person
doesn't have the money
to even protect themself,
let alone the will
to try to figure out the
complexities of derivatives
and naked shorting
and algorithms,
which are computer programs that
are used to manipulate markets.
And it gets to the point where
people just throw in the flag.
You know, even a few years ago,
they might be looking at the TV
and saying oh, well
the Dow is going up.
I guess things are better.
People don't even look
at the Dow anymore.
In fact, there's been outflows.
They have statistics
that measure people's
inflows and outflows
into mutual funds.
And they've been net outflow
I think for two straight years
every single month.
So when you see
the Dow going up,
you got to say well,
who's buying it.
And the same goes with gold.
You say well, why is it
not going up this year?
Why does it seem like every
time something wildly bullish
for gold happens, it just
plummets $20.00 in 10 seconds.
OK.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: And it's the
same reason; the government
is creating paper on one side
to support things that it likes.
And it's creating
paper on the other side
to manipulate the price
of things it doesn't like.
>>REGINA: So what
is the advantage
of manipulating
the price of gold
downward and
keeping a lid on it?
>>HOFFMAN: Because it
keeps it out of the news.
When people see gold going
up, even the mainstream media
will be forced to write
inflation expectations,
inflation fears.
The government, the Fed's
policies are not working.
The Fed is supposedly in charge.
They supposedly
know what's right.
And so they must keep it down.
Because there's such a tiny
supply of gold in the world.
I mean, it's probably only
a couple of trillion dollars
of gold that's ever been mined.
Of course, almost all of
it is hidden in vaults
that you'll never see again.
As far as silver, there's only
about a billion ounces above
ground existing, because most of
it's been depleted by industry.
A billion ounces is
worth $30 billion.
I think there's 1,200
billionaires in the world.
And there's probably 10
times as many corporations
that could take that
supply out, much of which,
again, is sitting in
vaults, never to be used.
So it's a very fine line about
the physical supply of gold
and silver, and the
paper naked shorting
that tries to hold them down.
>>REGINA: And let's
talk about that.
Because now once you
realize the fraud
that was going on in the world,
including in your own life,
including among your fellow
employees and your bosses
and so forth, you decided
to get out of the game.
And other people I've
interviewed did the same thing.
And the first
place they went was
anything-- go to high ground,
go to higher ground, which
was to gold and silver.
And so now that's
really what you do.
That's a big part
of your life is
gold and silver, and the
marketing of gold and silver.
So let's just be upfront about
that, and it's for a reason.
Because that was the only safe
place you could see to go.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
Gold and silver is
the highest ground.
>>REGINA: The highest
ground, right.
>>HOFFMAN: I mean, there is
no other ground even close.
>>REGINA: And I agree.
From everything I've seen,
read, and looked into,
it seems that's a very
clear and true statement.
So now let's talk about real
gold and its value right
now, today, as opposed to paper
gold and the manipulated gold
prices.
And the same thing with silver.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, without
being too technical,
the physical price of
gold-- well, I should say,
the price that you
see on your screen
for gold is about $1,600.
And the price you see on your
screen for silver is about $28
an ounce.
Of course, you will pay
premiums in the real world.
If you want to buy
an ounce of gold,
it'll probably cost
closer to $1,700 today.
The premiums for gold and
silver are typically five to 15%
in normal market conditions.
But we've seen them
blow out-- in 2008,
they got as high as almost
100% in the silver market,
and not quite that high
in gold, but pretty high.
When people fear it, and when
these manipulations start
to falter, and people
get fear and start
to try to buy the physical
from like firms like my firm,
then the premiums extend.
And the mints run out
of gold and silver.
And the delays of when you're
going to get it get larger.
So again, it's a very fine line
of-- that the manipulators are
fighting.
Because when it goes too
high, we run out of supply.
But when it goes too low,
we do the same thing.
And that's the beauty of
about gold and silver, which
shows you why it's
not an investment.
But it's money.
The bull market in gold
and silver, which is again,
it's really just a bear
market in currencies.
It's not like a
gold coin has gained
in value over the past 10 years.
It's the currencies that
it's being valued in.
Not just the dollar, the
euro, the rupee, yuan,
that's been going down in value.
And what's been causing it,
what's been causing people
to trade in those dollars
and euros for gold and silver
is not greed but fear.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: So when you buy
even land, or certainly
stocks and bonds,
you're buying it
because you want to gain value.
You want this thing
to grow in value.
Whereas with gold, you
buy it because you're
scared that everything else is
going to lose value against it.
>>REGINA: Right.
So let's take this
period of time.
And right now, we're talking
it's the beginning of August.
What is happening
with the supplies?
If a person watching
the news going on,
watching what's happening in
Europe right now with Greece,
with Spain, soon
to be Italy, what
is the supply situation
like with gold?
And what do you expect it to
be over the next few months?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, it's
been interesting.
Because again, starting, really
starting September last year
when gold hit $1,920 an ounce,
which was over Labor Day,
literally on Labor Day.
I was watching it.
And it never trades
on Labor Day.
>>REGINA: You mean when
nobody's paying attention
because we're all at barbecues.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah, people
were that scared.
People were actually buying in
those thinly traded computer
markets on Labor Day, OK.
And since that time, that
was during the debt debacle.
That was also during
the last European crash
that was last summer.
When that was happening,
right after that happened,
the government started
attacking the paper price.
It's been going on
now it's almost a year
like I've never seen before, OK.
Now, in the United States,
they've been so good at it,
it's been so relentless,
that they actually
have sapped sentiment
a bit this year.
Now I'd say my firm's
sales are about-- last year
they were record high.
They're about the
same this year.
They're not higher.
>>REGINA: Which considering
what's going on,
they should be
quite a bit higher.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah, but
staying at a record level,
considering that gold
hasn't gone anywhere,
the efforts that have
been made to keep it down
should tell you how strong
the underlying demand is.
Now that's only one part of it.
Again, the other Achilles
heel of these manipulators
is that gold is priced
in all currencies.
So it's one thing to try
to keep it down in dollars,
but there's only
300 million people
in the worl-- in
the United States.
And there's another
6 plus billion
around the world who
trade in other currencies.
Now the euro has been
collapsing against the dollar.
So guess what?
Euro gold is almost
at its all time high.
As we speak, it's
about 5% from it.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it makes sense.
>>HOFFMAN: Whereas, the
US price is 20% below.
So when I say
they're manipulating,
it's not just the US.
It could be people
from Greece alone,
and Spain, who blow
out this cartel,
because they all at once, you
know, the bank runs intensify,
and they say, we don't
want to be Spanish banks.
We want to be in real money.
And so the point is
it's like putting
the fingers in the dike.
There's just holes
popping up everywhere.
They can't-- for one, they can't
keep the physical price down.
Because when they push
the paper price too low,
everyone comes to
our firm and buys it.
That's when demand takes off.
And for two, if they try
to make it like, oh, they
want you to think because
the euro collapsing-- Europe
is collapsing, it's a deflation.
But the fact is when
the euro collapses,
people have
inflation over there.
They had record gasoline
prices in Europe this summer.
So people want to buy gold.
So again, it's
very, very difficult
for them to just to keep
it flat, like you said,
let alone to keep
it from exploding.
And yes, what I think
is going to happen,
I think it's going to
go to levels that people
can't imagine.
But again, there's a difference
between the real value
and the nominal value.
Because I can do the simple
math and say gold price
should be today $15,000
to $20,000 an ounce.
I mean--
>>REGINA: $15,000 to $20,000.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
That's not like predicting
a stock will go up.
I'm saying this is how much
money the government tells you
they've printed.
Not that they've
actually printed.
It's what they tell
you they printed.
>>REGINA: So with that ratio,
that should be what it's worth.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
That's what it should be today.
Of course, each minute
they print another dollar,
that price target goes up.
So at some point, I believe,
as all fiat currencies do,
the dollar will go.
And gold will become
infinite in current dollars
for what that's worth.
It may cost a zillion dollars
to buy a loaf of bread.
But it will maintain
its purchasing power.
>>REGINA: Well, let's
talk about hyperinflation
in real terms, because I
watch all these things.
I'm curious about
all of them, so I
do watch all these indicators.
And I even watch things
like the price of rice
at the grocery store.
I know what's
happened with rice.
>>HOFFMAN: I have
it on my screen.
Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Over the
last three years.
And many other things,
toilet paper, all the basics.
If people are not
paying attention,
why don't you fill them in as
to what the actual numbers are
on basics the last two
to three years alone.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, it's funny
you should mention rice.
I actually wrote
a piece last year.
I think it was called
something like "The Most
Important Commodity on Earth."
And everyone thought it was
gold that I was writing about.
And I said no, it's rice.
Because that's what sustains
the most people in the world.
And the price of rice is not
its all time high right now.
It was last year, but
it's not too far from it.
And of course, now
agricultural commodities,
inflation is part of
it, but there's also
other factors like this drought.
People don't realize
the price of corn
is at an all time
high right now.
The price of soybeans is
near an all time high.
The price of wheat
has been surging.
You know, this may not
affect people on Wall Street,
but it affects people all
over the world, especially
those that don't have currencies
that can be kept stable.
The Indian rupee
right now, everyone
thinks India is such a
wildly amazing country
with their economy growing.
The Indian rupee is collapsing.
And I mean it's
really, it's down 30%
this year against the dollar.
Again, rupee gold is
near an all time high.
So again, and after
that, now the government
is trying to keep the people
in India who love gold and hate
rupees, they don't
want them to buy gold.
So you're getting a
combination of inflation,
monetary po-- crazy monetary
policy, draconian government
action all at once.
But the fact is prices of food
are up huge around the world.
>>REGINA: Well, instead
of itemizing what's up
and-- because I've noticed
just thumbnail, 100,
200% on a lot of
our basic items.
>>HOFFMAN: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Over the
last three years.
100 to 200% percent.
And I'm sure people, especially
if someone has lost their job,
or they're on a
fixed income, have
to be noticing the
squeezes on this.
And this is even at
the discount markets.
So we're not really--
we haven't tanked yet.
What do you expect to
see over the next year?
And is there any kind of hedge
on just a really simple level,
other than stock-- going to
Costco and buying a couple
jumbo packs, or five
jumbo packs of toilet
paper and some light bulbs.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, this is
what I tell everyone to do.
This is protection 101.
Forget-- well, I mean you
know, your financial protection
is gold and silver.
But you have to be ready
for hyperinflation, which
includes higher
prices, and also--
>>REGINA: Do you expect
to see hyperinflation?
>>HOFFMAN: Inevitably,
it must happen.
It happens to every
fiat currency.
Every one.
And again, every currency in
the world is a fiat currency.
And they're all pretty much
anchored to the dollar.
It will happen.
It's only a matter of how
long can the powers that be
keep the game going.
And while they keep it going,
it'll be like frogs in a pot.
You'll still see the
inflation go up, up, up.
Some places like
India where people
don't seem to care as
much, as least over here,
it'll be much worse.
But it will keep going up until
eventually the big one, as I
call it, happens when
the Federal Reserve can
no longer create a perception
that everything's OK.
The fact--
>>REGINA: And this is all
perception at this point.
Like I said in the
very beginning,
this is infotainment.
It's all a charade.
>>HOFFMAN: They had tools.
You know, again we're
talking about the 1970s.
They could actually raise
interest rates back then.
Because people didn't have
zillions of dollars of debt.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: Now they can't
do any of that stuff.
Because every-- first of all,
they've tried everything.
Everything's failed.
So the way I put
every day, I say
the only thing they have
left is money printing,
market manipulation to
create this perception,
and propaganda, just telling
you things are all right.
Now the propaganda is
not working anymore.
I mean, people are out of work.
And if you're in
Greece, I mean, they're
voting Nazis into office.
It really doesn't work to
try to pretend things are OK.
And of course, the
market manipulation
is becoming so obvious
that it's starting
to become mainstream
in many ways.
I mean, I'm highlighting
this constantly.
How many mainstream
outlets are starting
to talk about the
plunge protection team.
And to realize that quantitative
easing is manipulation.
I mean, the government bought
60% of all the treasury bonds
last year.
And they try to act like on,
still on CNBC, bonds are up.
>>REGINA: Yeah, you
keep buying them.
[LAUGHTER]
>>HOFFMAN: When they're
telling you who's buying them.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
OK, so now, a lot of times when
you get into this conversation,
we start getting
into an ego mode.
You know, the United States
is losing it superpower status
economically.
And China's moving
into the lead.
But let's look at what's
really happening to the Chinese
as well.
This is not a pat
picture at all.
>>HOFFMAN: No,
again the Chinese,
for whatever they take, they've
gotta feed five extra people.
They're five to one population.
So they have create-- they
have gained all of the market
share of manufacturing, which
would have happened anyway.
I mean, more people need jobs.
They're going to
lower the wages.
And the United
States promoted that.
All these same corporations
and Wall Street people
that got rid of
Glass Steagall also
lobbied for all the
international trade agreements
like NAFTA and Gada, and
all those things that
allowed the nations to
outsource to other nations--
the corporations to
outsource to other nations.
Now people say, oh,
these evil corporations.
GE, oh, they're sending
the-- no, corporations,
their job is to make profits.
I would do the same
thing if you allowed
me to have things made
in China by people
making a tenth of the cost.
I mean, that's
just good business.
The Chinese government, because
they had so many people,
realized, well, we better let
the capitalists come in here.
Because we need jobs.
And the fact is, they're
never going to go back.
Because forget even the
union stuff over here,
the fact is the
prices will always
be lower for wages over there.
And they're harder
working because they
don't have insurance
or a safety net.
They need to work.
And so that was part of it.
We helped to create that.
It would have happened anyway.
And the fact is OK, great.
All of the market share of
manufacturing is in China.
But look how they're doing.
Part of the reason they were
able to keep the costs so low
was by pegging the Chinese
yuan to the dollar,
which people don't realize--
>>REGINA: And that changed,
that shifted last week.
Didn't they decide
to allow it to--
>>HOFFMAN: A little bit.
>>REGINA: Little?
>>HOFFMAN: I mean, they've
been allowing for the last five
or 10 years it to inch
higher, but nothing like what
it would be if they
just let it go.
It would just explode
against the dollar.
And there would be
major ramifications,
negative either way.
They keep it where
it is, it's bad.
If they let it go
the other way, we'd
have hyperinflation here
immediately, because, you know.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: So the fact
is, the Chinese created
an artificial environment.
Our corporations,
and politicians,
and bankers foster
that environment,
which during good times
seemed like a good thing.
It also-- it created speculation
in China with all the
newfound riches, which caused a
stock bubble and a real estate
bubble, which are all
crashing right now.
And then, of course,
people are realizing now
that the rest the world,
including their big customer,
the United States, are
not spending anymore,
that they're in a
major recession.
So they're seeing a drop
in industrial demand,
in manufacturing output.
They're seeing a bursting of
their stock in real estate
bubbles.
And again, it's just
a communist government
run by a couple
of dozen jerks who
know nothing about economics.
So there-- I mean, I'd rather
be here than there are any day,
because they're going to have
a lot, a lot of unhappy people
that are going to be starving.
>>REGINA: Well, and
you know, we hear about
and we see the pictures of
these strange condominium
developments that are empty
because it hasn't really
been brought up.
>>HOFFMAN: Ghost cities.
>>REGINA: Ghost
cities and the like.
Well, in reality,
the last stat I
read was something like
a third of the people
are still living without
electricity, without plumbing,
and without kitchens.
Just ordinarily, it's not
as though the standard
of life across the
board has been raised.
I mean, for some perhaps, but--
>>HOFFMAN: That's
absolutely right.
It was in the cities.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: The big cities
got all the wealth.
It's not unlike
what's happened here,
where the banks, and
the defense contractors,
and a few the big
corporations had
huge, huge growth in the
last couple of decades,
but not the average company.
I mean, in China
again, it's also
it's a tiered society,
where a lot of money
went to a small
amount of people.
The government,
because of the boom,
had enough revenue to kind
of do their socialist thing.
But that's a problem
with socialism.
When you don't have money,
you can't pay for everyone.
>>REGINA: Yet at
the same time, I've
also read that they've
been stockpiling
huge amounts of
currencies and also
very large amounts of gold,
warehouses of the stuff.
So how does that play in?
They're obviously attempting to
make their future more secure.
>>HOFFMAN: Well,
that's the one thing
they do have that's because
they've been selling so
many things to the
United States and Europe,
they have built trillions and
trillions of currency reserves.
I think it's over
$3 trillion now.
They also know that
those dollars and euros
are depreciating
because of inflation.
So not only do they have all
this depreciating currency
coming in, but they fear
for what they already have.
So they have been, I
mean, buying everything.
>>REGINA: They're buying
gold, right, gold like crazy.
>>HOFFMAN: Everything.
>>REGINA: Every commodity.
They are buying gold.
They are buying--
>>REGINA: But that's smart.
>>HOFFMAN: Of course.
>>REGINA: That's smart.
>>HOFFMAN: They know that the
dollar's going to be worthless.
And they also know that he who
has the gold makes the rules.
When this all breaks apart,
the currencies, which
could be this year, next year,
I mean two years, who knows,
whoever has the gold
is going to be rich
because there'll
be a new standard,
a new kind of currency
standard based on real money.
People will look into Fort Knox,
thinking the United States is
going to be rich and
realize it's all gone.
It's been leased out.
It's been sold.
The Chinese, the
Russians, the Arabs,
basically anyone who's
had an inflow of income
has been buying them,
the gold and silver.
And they are the ones
who are going to be rich.
So the Chinese, not only
have they been buying it
for themselves, but
for years they've
been promoting, actively
promoting, for the public
to be buying it.
Because they want the
public to have gold,
too, so everyone's wealthy.
Heck, they might
confiscated it from them,
but they want to make
sure that it's in China.
Whereas in here--
>>REGINA: It's smart.
>>HOFFMAN: The only promotion
we get is cash for gold.
Sell us your gold at
10 cents on the dollar.
Whereas there, they
tell them to buy gold.
Because they want the
nation to get wealthier.
>>REGINA: Well,
at least somebody
on the planet's
thinking long term.
>>HOFFMAN: They definitely
got that part right.
>>REGINA: Exactly,
which we don't.
We're not known for that.
And I wanted to ask you.
This isn't a trick
question, but I
just-- we only have
a few minutes left.
And I probably shouldn't
use our time this way.
But I've never
understood derivatives.
And I remember
watching the film,
"Inside Job," where
the question was posed,
could you please explain
derivatives to someone--
I can't remember the name
the person-- very high up.
And they couldn't.
They stumbled.
And finally everyone
was giggling.
And that was the end
of the conversation.
So can you explain
what a derivative is?
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
In the simplest
form, a derivative
just means a security that
derives its value based
on the movement of
another security.
>>REGINA: What's
that really mean?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, I
wrote a piece last year
called "The
Single-Celled Option,"
trying to say how like
you have one cell.
And then it splits.
And it splits.
And it becomes a whole organism.
When they created stock
options back in early '70s,
it was like OK,
you buy something.
You pay a premium,
maybe a dollar or two,
so that if a stock is
above $20 in the future,
you can get the difference.
If it's 25 and you have a
$20 call option, you make $5.
It's very simple.
So that proliferated,
because people realized
they can control more capital
with a smaller investment.
The problem with the option,
though, is that it expires.
And most of them
expire worthless.
So yes, you can make more money.
But you're probably instead--
>>REGINA: It can expire
at a bad time, too.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
>>REGINA: The timing can be off.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
You don't know
when it-- the point
is, most people lose
money in options.
It's a loser's game, OK.
But people loved it because
Americans love leverage.
And Britons love leverage.
Everyone loves leverage
until, of course, they lose.
And when the banks
took over the system,
as I'm talking about in
the '80s and the '90s,
they created much more complex
derivatives, there's futures,
there's options, there's
collateral mortgage,
what do you call them, CMOs,
Collateral Mortgage Obligations
where they package
up real estate
and split it into pieces.
You can buy the interest
only, the property--
>>REGINA: I've got
to say, you know
what, it's still kind of
sounding like Greek to me.
And we only have about a
minute left to wrap that up.
>>HOFFMAN: And my
point is, they've
created these complex,
intertwined options, where
it's a zero sum game.
Because if one person
loses, the other person
won't have money to pay them.
So everyone loses.
>>REGINA: Everybody loses.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
>>REGINA: OK, well
that sounds like that's
been the story of derivatives
from the headline news anyway.
So just to give us an
idea, and you've already
made various references
to it along the way,
but just give us a one,
two, three, four, five,
we only have a
minute or so left,
in terms of what
we can do now which
might be a little late in
the game for a lot of people,
if you haven't already
considered what's coming up.
>>HOFFMAN: If you still have
a net worth left, a liquid net
worth, I recommend putting
as much of it as possible
into physical gold and silver,
and even a little of what
they call junk silver, which is
the old dimes, because they're
a very small denomination.
>>REGINA: 90% silver.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah, exactly.
That's a great way to
restore your wealth.
And also, just think about
the worst case scenario.
Forget about investment,
stocks, bonds, those things.
Think what happens if
inflation gets really bad?
And that means protect
yourself with getting out
of debt for one
thing, making sure
that you have stocks of food
and other life necessities,
and of course, I can't
emphasize enough, physical gold
and silver.
>>REGINA: I'm with you on that.
I mean, I've been following
the same strategy, and which
is why I think I appreciate
your work so much,
is because from a
conservative position,
we were told back in 19--
no, back in 2006 what
would be coming down in 2008,
which everything came right
on schedule.
And so we've been thinking
about it for quite a long time.
So I'm hoping that
this has helped
you unravel some of the mystery
about the financial world a bit
as well.
Even more so, I'm
hoping this conversation
is giving you a little better
of an understanding of how
to take care of
you and your family
as the times go on,
because I don't think
it's going to get a lot easier.
It may get a lot worse.
And meanwhile, there
are other types
of currencies that have been
used throughout history,
one of them is known as
complimentary currencies,
to help stem some of the
problems in times like this.
And along that line, you
might enjoy my interview
with Stephen Belgin, if you
have not already watched it.
Until next time, thanks for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.